README.md, before:

# Chutoro

This is a generated project using [Copier](https://copier.readthedocs.io/).

> **Walking skeleton:** The CPU-only build currently partitions inputs into
> placeholder buckets sized by `min_cluster_size`. This stub proves the
> orchestration wiring and will be replaced by the HNSW + MST +
> hierarchy extraction pipeline described in
> [`docs/chutoro-design.md`](docs/chutoro-design.md).

## Distance cache determinism and metrics

The shared `DistanceCache` resolves neighbour ties deterministically: when
distances are equal it chooses the lower item id; if ids match it falls back to
the insertion sequence number. This rule is used across builds and tests to
guarantee stable outputs under fixed seeds.

With the `metrics` feature flag enabled the cache emits the following telemetry
via the `metrics` crate:

- `distance_cache_hits` (counter)
- `distance_cache_misses` (counter)
- `distance_cache_evictions` (counter)
- `distance_cache_lookup_latency_histogram` (histogram, seconds)

These metric names are stable for downstream crates.

## Debugging property tests

Mutation properties (`hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest`) exercise
add, delete, and reconfigure paths with invariant sweeps.

- Run: `cargo test -p chutoro-core hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest`
- Reproduce: `cargo test --seed <SEED> -p chutoro-core \
  hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest --exact --nocapture`
- Verbose logs: `RUST_LOG=debug cargo test --seed <SEED> -p chutoro-core \
  hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest --exact --nocapture`
- Stress runs: raise `PROPTEST_CASES` in `chutoro-core/src/hnsw/tests/mod.rs`
  or set the env var when invoking `cargo test`.
- See `docs/property-testing-design.md#debugging-proptest-failures` for
  interpreting violations and log output.

Commit message:

feat(cpu): implement full CPU FISHDBC clustering pipeline
Replaced the prior placeholder CPU walking skeleton with a complete
CPU clustering pipeline implementing FISHDBC. This includes HNSW indexing
with candidate edge harvesting, mutual-reachability minimum spanning tree
construction via parallel Kruskal's algorithm, and hierarchy extraction
from the MST using a single-linkage dendrogram followed by HDBSCAN-style
condensation and stability scoring.

Added new modules for hierarchy extraction and single-linkage condensation
with deterministic clustering results supporting noise identification.

Refactored features so the `cpu` feature enables this full pipeline by default,
and removed legacy `skeleton` feature gating. The `gpu` feature remains an
orchestration stub for future accelerators.

Updated CLI, documentation, tests, and error types to align with this
implementation. This work replaces the walking skeleton stub with a robust
CPU clustering backend providing improved clustering quality validated
against public datasets with ARI and NMI metrics.

Co-authored-by: terragon-labs[bot] <terragon-labs[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

README.md, after:

# Chutoro

This is a generated project using [Copier](https://copier.readthedocs.io/).

The default CPU backend executes the FISHDBC pipeline (HNSW construction with
candidate edge harvest, mutual-reachability MST construction, and stability
based hierarchy extraction) as described in
[`docs/chutoro-design.md`](docs/chutoro-design.md).

## Distance cache determinism and metrics

The shared `DistanceCache` resolves neighbour ties deterministically: when
distances are equal it chooses the lower item id; if ids match it falls back to
the insertion sequence number. This rule is used across builds and tests to
guarantee stable outputs under fixed seeds.

With the `metrics` feature flag enabled the cache emits the following telemetry
via the `metrics` crate:

- `distance_cache_hits` (counter)
- `distance_cache_misses` (counter)
- `distance_cache_evictions` (counter)
- `distance_cache_lookup_latency_histogram` (histogram, seconds)

These metric names are stable for downstream crates.

## Debugging property tests

Mutation properties (`hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest`) exercise
add, delete, and reconfigure paths with invariant sweeps.

- Run: `cargo test -p chutoro-core hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest`
- Reproduce: `cargo test --seed <SEED> -p chutoro-core \
  hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest --exact --nocapture`
- Verbose logs: `RUST_LOG=debug cargo test --seed <SEED> -p chutoro-core \
  hnsw_mutations_preserve_invariants_proptest --exact --nocapture`
- Stress runs: raise `PROPTEST_CASES` in `chutoro-core/src/hnsw/tests/mod.rs`
  or set the env var when invoking `cargo test`.
- See `docs/property-testing-design.md#debugging-proptest-failures` for
  interpreting violations and log output.
