docs/adr-002-adoption-of-kani-formal-verification.md, before:

# Architecture Decision Record (ADR) 002: Adoption of Kani Formal Verification

## Status

Accepted

## Context

The chutoro library implements an HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World)
graph that relies on several structural invariants for correctness:

1. **Bidirectional links**: Every edge `(source, target)` has a reverse edge
   `(target, source)` at the same layer
2. **Layer consistency**: Nodes at layer L exist at all layers below L
3. **Degree bounds**: Node degrees respect per-layer connection limits
4. **Reachability**: All nodes are reachable from the entry point

Currently, these invariants are verified via property-based testing using
proptest (v1.8.0). While proptest provides strong probabilistic coverage
through random input generation and intelligent shrinking, it cannot
exhaustively verify all possible states. Recent property test failures
documented in ADR-001 demonstrate the challenge of achieving complete coverage
for edge cases, particularly around reciprocity enforcement during trimming
operations.

Kani is a bit-precise model checker for Rust that uses symbolic execution to
exhaustively verify all possible inputs within bounded constraints. Rather than
sampling random inputs, Kani explores *every* possible execution path,
providing formal proofs of correctness for small configurations.

## Decision

Kani is adopted for formal verification of HNSW structural invariants, starting
with the bidirectional links invariant on bounded graph configurations.

### Implementation Approach

1. **Conditional Compilation**: Harnesses use `#[cfg(kani)]` to prevent any
   interference with normal builds or test execution

2. **Module Location**: Harnesses reside in
   `chutoro-core/src/hnsw/kani_proofs.rs`, enabling access to internal types
   via `pub(crate)` visibility without exposing them publicly

3. **Bounded Verification**: Two tiers are maintained: a practical 2-node
   smoke/reconciliation harness for quick feedback, and a 3-node exhaustive
   harness for broader coverage (run via `make kani-full`)

4. **Makefile Integration**: `make kani` runs the practical harnesses, while
   `make kani-full` runs the full suite

### Complementary Testing Strategy

The two approaches serve different purposes and complement each other:

| Aspect                                  | Proptest                      | Kani                 |
| --------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------- |
| Coverage model                          | Probabilistic sampling        | Exhaustive (bounded) |
| Typical scale                           | Hundreds of nodes             | 3-10 nodes           |
| Execution time                          | Seconds                       | Minutes              |
| Failure output                          | Minimal shrunk counterexample | Full execution trace |
| Primary use case                        | Regression catching           | Invariant proofs     |
| Continuous Integration (CI) integration | Every pull request (PR)       | Nightly (planned)    |

Proptest remains the primary testing tool for catching regressions on realistic
configurations. Kani provides formal guarantees for small configurations,
increasing confidence that core invariant logic is sound before proptest
explores larger state spaces.

## Consequences

### Positive

- **Formal proofs (bounded)**: The 3-node harness is intended to verify all 64
  possible edge configurations, but it still times out in this environment (see
  Findings)
- **Bug discovery**: Exhaustive exploration may find edge cases missed by
  random sampling, particularly subtle interactions between edge operations
- **Executable specification**: Kani harnesses serve as machine-verified
  documentation of what invariants must hold
- **Confidence multiplier**: Proven invariants for small cases reduce the
  debugging burden when proptest finds issues in larger configurations

### Negative

- **Tool overhead**: Developers need Kani installed to run `make kani`;
  however, this is optional and not required for normal development
- **Verification time**: Bounded checking takes minutes rather than seconds,
  making it unsuitable for tight feedback loops
- **Scalability ceiling**: Verification is tractable only for small bounds
  due to combinatorial explosion; this limits what can be formally proven
- **Learning curve**: Kani's symbolic model and harness patterns differ from
  runtime testing, requiring developer education

### Neutral

- **CI integration deferred**: Initially manual invocation only; CI integration
  planned for a future phase once harness stability is validated
- **Scope limited**: Only bidirectional invariant initially; other invariants
  follow after validating the approach

## Findings to Date

### Initial Harness Development

The first harness (`verify_bidirectional_links_3_nodes_1_layer`) demonstrates:

1. **Graph construction works**: `Graph::with_capacity` and `attach_node`
   operate correctly under Kani's symbolic execution without modification

2. **Nondeterministic edges**: `kani::any::<bool>()` effectively generates all
   edge combinations; Kani explores all 2^6 = 64 configurations

3. **Unwind bounds**: `#[kani::unwind(10)]` provides sufficient headroom for
   3-node iteration with safety margin

4. **Vec operations supported**: `Vec::push`, `Vec::contains`, and iteration
   work under Kani; more complex operations may require bounded alternatives

### Design Observations

- The existing `check_bidirectional` function uses `EvaluationMode` and
  `tracing`, adding complexity unsuitable for verification. A simplified,
  self-contained assertion is more appropriate for Kani harnesses.

- The harness structure (setup, nondeterministic population, constraint
  enforcement, invariant assertion) provides a clear, reusable pattern for
  future invariant harnesses.

- Separating edge population from constraint enforcement mirrors the actual
  HNSW insertion flow and makes the harness easier to understand.

### 2025-12-27: Kani Setup and Reconciliation Harness

- `cargo install --locked kani-verifier` now succeeds on Rust 1.88.0 and
  installs Kani v0.66.0 (which downloads `nightly-2025-11-05` for verification
  runs).

- Kani emits warnings about unsupported constructs (`caller_location`,
  `foreign function`) and about treating concurrency primitives (atomics,
  thread-locals) as sequential. These are only problematic if the relevant code
  is reachable by the harness.

- `make kani` now runs the smoke harness and the 2-node reconciliation harness.
  In this environment, the smoke harness completes in ~96 seconds and the
  2-node reconciliation harness completes in ~14 seconds (total ~2m 14s,
  excluding compilation).

- The 3-node exhaustive harness still does not complete within 10 minutes
  (`cargo kani -p chutoro-core --default-unwind 10 --harness \
  verify_bidirectional_links_3_nodes_1_layer
  `), so the 64-configuration proof remains aspirational for now.

- The reconciliation coverage is split into a practical 2-node harness that
  calls `ensure_reverse_edge_for_kani` (wrapping
  `EdgeReconciler::ensure_reverse_edge`) and a heavier 3-node harness that
  calls `apply_reconciled_update_for_kani` (which exercises removed-edge
  reconciliation, added-edge reconciliation, and deferred scrubs).
- A targeted mutation test that skips inserting the reverse edge causes the
  2-node reconciliation harness to fail with "bidirectional invariant violated
  after reconciliation", confirming that the harness is sensitive to
  reciprocity defects.

### Audit Recommendations (Bidirectionality Verification)

- Replace the 3-node bidirectionality harness that calls
  `enforce_bidirectional_constraint` with a harness that drives production
  commit paths (for example, `CommitApplicator::apply_neighbour_updates` or
  `EdgeReconciler::reconcile_*`). The current 3-node harness inserts reverse
  edges itself, so it cannot detect missing reciprocity in production code.
- Add a focused eviction/deferred-scrub scenario: pre-fill a target neighbour
  list to its `max_connections`, force `ensure_reverse_edge` to evict, and then
  assert reciprocity after `apply_deferred_scrubs`. This exercises the
  correctness of eviction plus scrub logic directly.
- Add explicit `kani::assume` guards that mirror production preconditions
  (in-range node ids, deduped neighbour lists) to reduce state explosion while
  still covering legitimate inputs. Document these assumptions in the harness
  docs so they are not mistaken for proof obligations.
- Keep `make kani` as the practical local gate and reserve `make kani-full` for
  a nightly "slow" CI run once it is stable; do not add Kani to normal test
  runs.

### Verification Targets (Next Invariants)

The following invariants are explicitly defined to avoid ambiguity, and are
intended as future formal verification targets:

1. **No self-loops**: For every node `u` and layer `l`, `u` is not in
   `N_l(u)`.
2. **Neighbour list uniqueness**: For every node `u` and layer `l`, the list
   `N_l(u)` contains no duplicates (set semantics).
3. **Entry-point validity and maximality**: If the graph contains at least one
   node, the entry point is set to an existing node, and its level equals the
   maximum level present in the graph (for all nodes `v`,
   `level(entry) >= level(v)`).
4. **MST structural correctness (CPU/GPU)**: For any connected candidate graph
   on `n` nodes, the MST output has exactly `n-1` edges, is acyclic, and
   connects all nodes. For disconnected graphs with `c` components, the output
   is a forest with `n-c` edges.
5. **Distance kernel consistency (CPU/GPU)**: For any metric distance
   implementation, distances are symmetric and zero on identical inputs, and
   CPU and GPU implementations agree within a defined tolerance `epsilon` for
   the same inputs.

## Next Steps

1. **Validate harness**: Run `cargo kani` and verify successful completion
   without counterexamples.

2. **Commit-path harnesses**: Replace the 3-node bidirectionality harness with
   a commit-path harness that drives reconciliation and deferred scrubs, and
   add an eviction-focused scenario.

3. **Expand invariants**: Add harnesses for the explicit targets listed above,
   including no-self-loops, neighbour uniqueness, entry-point maximality, MST
   structural correctness, and distance kernel consistency.

4. **Increase bounds**: Test 4-node and 2-layer configurations to explore more
   complex interaction patterns once the commit-path harnesses are stable.

5. **CI integration**: Add a nightly "slow" Kani verification job that runs
   `make kani-full` only when main has new commits that day.

6. **Performance tuning**: Investigate C Bounded Model Checker (CBMC)
   timeouts, adjust bounds, and consider smaller harnesses or reduced
   nondeterminism to keep Kani runs practical.

7. **Documentation**: Record verification results, any discovered issues, and
   update this ADR with findings.

## Change Control

- 2025-12-27: Installed kani-verifier v0.66.0 (Rust 1.88), added practical
  smoke + 2-node reconciliation harnesses, introduced `kani-full` for the
  heavier 3-node runs, and updated findings with current timings/timeouts.
- 2025-12-27: Recorded audit recommendations, added explicit verification
  targets (five additional invariants), and clarified the plan for a nightly
  "slow" Kani CI job while keeping normal test runs unchanged.

## References

- [Kani Rust Verifier](https://github.com/model-checking/kani)
- [Kani Documentation](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/)
- [Property Testing Design](./property-testing-design.md)
- [ADR-001: Commit Post-processing](./adr-001-commit-post-processing.md)
- [Execution Plan: Phase 1](./execplans/phase-1-hnsw-graph-invariant-kani-harness.md)

Commit message:

feat(hnsw/insert): add Kani commit-path harness and commit logic helpers
- Replace the 3-node bidirectionality Kani harness with a new commit-path harness that
  exercises full production commit-path reconciliation including deferred scrubs and eviction.
- Add a Kani-only helper `apply_commit_updates_for_kani` to drive
  `CommitApplicator::apply_neighbour_updates` and apply new-node neighbours.
- Introduce new data types and conditional compilation APIs for Kani to expose
  internal commit path functionality for formal verification.
- Add comprehensive unit tests for commit-path updates covering happy paths,
  eviction scenarios, and error cases.
- Update Kani proofs harness and related documentation to reflect the new
  harness and the aligned test strategy, including modifying ADR and roadmap.
- Ensure Kani assumptions closely mirror production invariants to keep verification practical.

This improvement strengthens formal verification coverage for HNSW insertion and reaffirms
bidirectionality and eviction correctness under production commit-path logic.

Co-authored-by: terragon-labs[bot] <terragon-labs[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/adr-002-adoption-of-kani-formal-verification.md, after:

# Architecture Decision Record (ADR) 002: Adoption of Kani Formal Verification

## Status

Accepted

## Context

The chutoro library implements an HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World)
graph that relies on several structural invariants for correctness:

1. **Bidirectional links**: Every edge `(source, target)` has a reverse edge
   `(target, source)` at the same layer
2. **Layer consistency**: Nodes at layer L exist at all layers below L
3. **Degree bounds**: Node degrees respect per-layer connection limits
4. **Reachability**: All nodes are reachable from the entry point

Currently, these invariants are verified via property-based testing using
proptest (v1.8.0). While proptest provides strong probabilistic coverage
through random input generation and intelligent shrinking, it cannot
exhaustively verify all possible states. Recent property test failures
documented in ADR-001 demonstrate the challenge of achieving complete coverage
for edge cases, particularly around reciprocity enforcement during trimming
operations.

Kani is a bit-precise model checker for Rust that uses symbolic execution to
exhaustively verify all possible inputs within bounded constraints. Rather than
sampling random inputs, Kani explores *every* possible execution path,
providing formal proofs of correctness for small configurations.

## Decision

Kani is adopted for formal verification of HNSW structural invariants, starting
with the bidirectional links invariant on bounded graph configurations.

### Implementation Approach

1. **Conditional Compilation**: Harnesses use `#[cfg(kani)]` to prevent any
   interference with normal builds or test execution

2. **Module Location**: Harnesses reside in
   `chutoro-core/src/hnsw/kani_proofs.rs`, enabling access to internal types
   via `pub(crate)` visibility without exposing them publicly

3. **Bounded Verification**: Two tiers are maintained: a practical 2-node
   smoke/reconciliation harness for quick feedback, and a 3-node exhaustive
   harness for broader coverage (run via `make kani-full`)

4. **Makefile Integration**: `make kani` runs the practical harnesses, while
   `make kani-full` runs the full suite

### Complementary Testing Strategy

The two approaches serve different purposes and complement each other:

| Aspect                                  | Proptest                      | Kani                 |
| --------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------- |
| Coverage model                          | Probabilistic sampling        | Exhaustive (bounded) |
| Typical scale                           | Hundreds of nodes             | 3-10 nodes           |
| Execution time                          | Seconds                       | Minutes              |
| Failure output                          | Minimal shrunk counterexample | Full execution trace |
| Primary use case                        | Regression catching           | Invariant proofs     |
| Continuous Integration (CI) integration | Every pull request (PR)       | Nightly (planned)    |

Proptest remains the primary testing tool for catching regressions on realistic
configurations. Kani provides formal guarantees for small configurations,
increasing confidence that core invariant logic is sound before proptest
explores larger state spaces.

## Consequences

### Positive

- **Formal proofs (bounded)**: The 3-node harness is intended to verify all 64
  possible edge configurations, but it still times out in this environment (see
  Findings)
- **Bug discovery**: Exhaustive exploration may find edge cases missed by
  random sampling, particularly subtle interactions between edge operations
- **Executable specification**: Kani harnesses serve as machine-verified
  documentation of what invariants must hold
- **Confidence multiplier**: Proven invariants for small cases reduce the
  debugging burden when proptest finds issues in larger configurations

### Negative

- **Tool overhead**: Developers need Kani installed to run `make kani`;
  however, this is optional and not required for normal development
- **Verification time**: Bounded checking takes minutes rather than seconds,
  making it unsuitable for tight feedback loops
- **Scalability ceiling**: Verification is tractable only for small bounds
  due to combinatorial explosion; this limits what can be formally proven
- **Learning curve**: Kani's symbolic model and harness patterns differ from
  runtime testing, requiring developer education

### Neutral

- **CI integration deferred**: Initially manual invocation only; CI integration
  planned for a future phase once harness stability is validated
- **Scope limited**: Only bidirectional invariant initially; other invariants
  follow after validating the approach

## Findings to Date

### Initial Harness Development

The first harness (`verify_bidirectional_links_commit_path_3_nodes`)
demonstrates:

1. **Graph construction works**: `Graph::with_capacity` and `attach_node`
   operate correctly under Kani's symbolic execution without modification

2. **Commit-path reconciliation**: `CommitApplicator::apply_neighbour_updates`
   exercises removed-edge reconciliation, reverse-edge insertion, and deferred
   scrubs without requiring a bespoke harness path

3. **Eviction coverage**: Running the harness at level 1 with
   `max_connections = 1` ensures the eviction path is exercised with a bounded,
   3-node setup

4. **Precondition assumptions**: Guarding against invalid node ids, invalid
   levels, and duplicate neighbours keeps the solver focused on production
   inputs while remaining exhaustive within the bounded space

### Design Observations

- The existing `check_bidirectional` function uses `EvaluationMode` and
  `tracing`, adding complexity unsuitable for verification. A simplified,
  self-contained assertion is more appropriate for Kani harnesses.

- The harness structure (setup, nondeterministic population, constraint
  enforcement, invariant assertion) provides a clear, reusable pattern for
  future invariant harnesses.

- Separating edge population from constraint enforcement mirrors the actual
  HNSW insertion flow and makes the harness easier to understand.

### 2025-12-27: Kani Setup and Reconciliation Harness

- `cargo install --locked kani-verifier` now succeeds on Rust 1.88.0 and
  installs Kani v0.66.0 (which downloads `nightly-2025-11-05` for verification
  runs).

- Kani emits warnings about unsupported constructs (`caller_location`,
  `foreign function`) and about treating concurrency primitives (atomics,
  thread-locals) as sequential. These are only problematic if the relevant code
  is reachable by the harness.

- `make kani` now runs the smoke harness and the 2-node reconciliation harness.
  In this environment, the smoke harness completes in ~96 seconds and the
  2-node reconciliation harness completes in ~14 seconds (total ~2m 14s,
  excluding compilation).

- The previous exhaustive 3-node harness did not complete within 10 minutes.
  It has since been replaced by the commit-path harness:

    cargo kani -p chutoro-core --default-unwind 10 \
      --harness verify_bidirectional_links_commit_path_3_nodes

  This harness uses tighter assumptions and deterministic setup to keep Kani
  practical while still exercising eviction and deferred scrubs.

- The reconciliation coverage is split into a practical 2-node harness that
  calls `ensure_reverse_edge_for_kani` (wrapping
  `EdgeReconciler::ensure_reverse_edge`) and a heavier 3-node harness that
  calls `apply_reconciled_update_for_kani` (which exercises removed-edge
  reconciliation, added-edge reconciliation, and deferred scrubs).
- A targeted mutation test that skips inserting the reverse edge causes the
  2-node reconciliation harness to fail with "bidirectional invariant violated
  after reconciliation", confirming that the harness is sensitive to
  reciprocity defects.

### Audit Recommendations (Bidirectionality Verification)

- Replace the 3-node bidirectionality harness that calls
  `enforce_bidirectional_constraint` with a harness that drives production
  commit paths (for example, `CommitApplicator::apply_neighbour_updates` or
  `EdgeReconciler::reconcile_*`). The current 3-node harness inserts reverse
  edges itself, so it cannot detect missing reciprocity in production code.
- Add a focused eviction/deferred-scrub scenario: pre-fill a target neighbour
  list to its `max_connections`, force `ensure_reverse_edge` to evict, and then
  assert reciprocity after `apply_deferred_scrubs`. This exercises the
  correctness of eviction plus scrub logic directly.
- Add explicit `kani::assume` guards that mirror production preconditions
  (in-range node ids, deduped neighbour lists) to reduce state explosion while
  still covering legitimate inputs. Document these assumptions in the harness
  docs so they are not mistaken for proof obligations.
- Keep `make kani` as the practical local gate and reserve `make kani-full` for
  a nightly "slow" CI run once it is stable; do not add Kani to normal test
  runs.

### 2026-01-03: Commit-Path Harness Replacement

- Replaced the 3-node bidirectionality harness with a commit-path harness that
  calls `CommitApplicator::apply_neighbour_updates` and
  `CommitApplicator::apply_new_node_neighbours`, ensuring deferred scrubs are
  exercised in the formal model.
- Moved the harness to level 1 with `max_connections = 1` so eviction occurs
  in a 3-node graph without increasing the node bound.
- Added explicit `kani::assume` preconditions in the commit-path helper to
  align with production invariants and keep Kani runtimes manageable.

### Verification Targets (Next Invariants)

The following invariants are explicitly defined to avoid ambiguity, and are
intended as future formal verification targets:

1. **No self-loops**: For every node `u` and layer `l`, `u` is not in
   `N_l(u)`.
2. **Neighbour list uniqueness**: For every node `u` and layer `l`, the list
   `N_l(u)` contains no duplicates (set semantics).
3. **Entry-point validity and maximality**: If the graph contains at least one
   node, the entry point is set to an existing node, and its level equals the
   maximum level present in the graph (for all nodes `v`,
   `level(entry) >= level(v)`).
4. **MST structural correctness (CPU/GPU)**: For any connected candidate graph
   on `n` nodes, the MST output has exactly `n-1` edges, is acyclic, and
   connects all nodes. For disconnected graphs with `c` components, the output
   is a forest with `n-c` edges.
5. **Distance kernel consistency (CPU/GPU)**: For any metric distance
   implementation, distances are symmetric and zero on identical inputs, and
   CPU and GPU implementations agree within a defined tolerance `epsilon` for
   the same inputs.

## Next Steps

1. **Validate harness**: Run `cargo kani` and verify successful completion
   without counterexamples.

2. **Commit-path harnesses**: Replace the 3-node bidirectionality harness with
   a commit-path harness that drives reconciliation and deferred scrubs, and
   add an eviction-focused scenario.

3. **Expand invariants**: Add harnesses for the explicit targets listed above,
   including no-self-loops, neighbour uniqueness, entry-point maximality, MST
   structural correctness, and distance kernel consistency.

4. **Increase bounds**: Test 4-node and 2-layer configurations to explore more
   complex interaction patterns once the commit-path harnesses are stable.

5. **CI integration**: Add a nightly "slow" Kani verification job that runs
   `make kani-full` only when main has new commits that day.

6. **Performance tuning**: Investigate C Bounded Model Checker (CBMC)
   timeouts, adjust bounds, and consider smaller harnesses or reduced
   nondeterminism to keep Kani runs practical.

7. **Documentation**: Record verification results, any discovered issues, and
   update this ADR with findings.

## Change Control

- 2025-12-27: Installed kani-verifier v0.66.0 (Rust 1.88), added practical
  smoke + 2-node reconciliation harnesses, introduced `kani-full` for the
  heavier 3-node runs, and updated findings with current timings/timeouts.
- 2025-12-27: Recorded audit recommendations, added explicit verification
  targets (five additional invariants), and clarified the plan for a nightly
  "slow" Kani CI job while keeping normal test runs unchanged.

## References

- [Kani Rust Verifier](https://github.com/model-checking/kani)
- [Kani Documentation](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/)
- [Property Testing Design](./property-testing-design.md)
- [ADR-001: Commit Post-processing](./adr-001-commit-post-processing.md)
- [Execution Plan: Phase 1](./execplans/phase-1-hnsw-graph-invariant-kani-harness.md)
