docs/developers-guide.md, before:

# Developers guide

This guide collects day-to-day practices for contributors working on the
Chutoro codebase. It complements the more specialized documents in `docs/` and
keeps operational guidance in one place.

## Benchmarks

The `chutoro-benches` crate provides Criterion benchmarks for the four CPU
pipeline stages: Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) index construction,
edge harvest, minimum spanning tree (MST) computation, and hierarchy extraction.

### Running benchmarks

Run all benchmarks from the repository root:

```sh
make bench
```

Criterion writes HTML reports to `target/criterion/`. Open the report for a
specific group (for example `target/criterion/hnsw_build/report/index.html`) to
view timing distributions and comparisons against previous runs.

### Benchmark regression workflow

Benchmark regression detection follows a two-tier strategy:

- Pull request (PR) workflows run a fast benchmark smoke check using
  discovery mode (`--list`) to confirm that benchmark binaries still compile
  and enumerate benchmark cases.
- A scheduled weekly workflow (plus manual `workflow_dispatch`) runs
  Criterion baseline comparison using `--save-baseline` and `--baseline`.

Run the local baseline workflow for one benchmark from the repository root:

```sh
set -o pipefail
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_MEMORY_PROFILE=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_RECALL_REPORT=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_CLUSTER_QUALITY_REPORT=0 \
cargo bench -p chutoro-benches --bench hnsw_ef_sweep -- --save-baseline local-reference --noplot \
  2>&1 | tee /tmp/bench-hnsw-ef-sweep-save.log

set -o pipefail
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_MEMORY_PROFILE=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_RECALL_REPORT=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_CLUSTER_QUALITY_REPORT=0 \
cargo bench -p chutoro-benches --bench hnsw_ef_sweep -- --baseline local-reference --noplot \
  2>&1 | tee /tmp/bench-hnsw-ef-sweep-compare.log
```

Use `--list` when you only need a quick discovery check:

```sh
set -o pipefail
cargo bench -p chutoro-benches --bench hnsw_ef_sweep -- --list \
  2>&1 | tee /tmp/bench-hnsw-ef-sweep-list.log
```

### Benchmark architecture

Benchmarks live in `chutoro-benches/benches/` as separate Criterion binaries.
Shared support code — the `SyntheticSource` data source, benchmark parameter
types, and the `BenchSetupError` error type — lives in the `chutoro-benches`
library (`chutoro-benches/src/`).

Each benchmark file follows this pattern:

1. A fallible `_impl` function performs all setup (data generation, HNSW
   build, MST computation) using `?` to propagate errors via `BenchSetupError`.
2. A thin wrapper registered with `criterion_group!` calls the `_impl`
   function and panics on failure.
3. The measured closure uses `b.iter()` or `b.iter_batched()` to time only
   the target operation.

### Lint policy for benchmarks

The `chutoro-benches` crate does **not** inherit workspace lints. Criterion's
macro expansions (`criterion_group!`, `criterion_main!`, `bench_with_input`
closures) trigger several of the strict workspace denials — most notably
`missing_docs`, `shadow_reuse`, and `excessive_nesting`. A crate-local
`[lints]` section in `chutoro-benches/Cargo.toml` mirrors the workspace
strictness for handwritten code. Benchmark source files use tightly scoped
`#![expect(lint, reason = "…")]` attributes for the lints that Criterion's
macro expansions unavoidably trigger. The rationale is documented in a comment
at the top of the `[lints.clippy]` section in `chutoro-benches/Cargo.toml`.

### Adding a new benchmark

1. Create a new file in `chutoro-benches/benches/`.
2. Add a corresponding `[[bench]]` entry in `chutoro-benches/Cargo.toml`.
3. Follow the fallible-setup pattern described above.
4. Use `#![expect(…)]` (not `#![allow(…)]`) for any Criterion-triggered lint
   suppressions, with a reason string.
5. Run `make bench` to verify the new benchmark appears in the output.

## Verus proofs

Verus is used for formal verification of edge harvest primitives. Run proofs
via `make verus`, which is idempotent and installs the pinned Verus release and
required Rust toolchain as needed.

### Quantifier trigger annotations

Verus prints warnings when it selects quantifier triggers automatically. Do not
ignore these warnings. Prefer explicit annotations so the prover behaviour is
stable and predictable:

- Use `#[trigger]` when a specific term should control instantiation.
- Use `#![auto]` only when the automatically chosen trigger is acceptable and
  the quantifier is straightforward.
- Avoid `--triggers-mode silent` in continuous integration (CI) because it
  hides trigger-selection changes.

Example:

```rust
assert forall|i: int| #![auto] 0 <= i < edges.len() implies edges[i].source == source_node;
```

Commit message:

feat(ci): improve benchmark CI with matrix and ref commit baseline
- Added benchmark matrix output from benchmark_regression_gate for dynamic CI matrix.
- Updated workflows to run benchmark smoke and baseline jobs per benchmark matrix.
- Resolved reference commit (HEAD^) for baseline comparison using git worktree.
- Save baseline from reference commit and compare current benchmarks against it.
- Enhanced tracing initialization in benchmark_regression_gate binary.
- Extended policy parsing to accept numeric strings for disabled and always-baseline.
- Fixed CLI tests to expect normalized benchmark event names.
- Updated docs to clarify CI benchmark baseline comparison strategy using previous commit.

This change improves CI reliability and flexibility by dynamically handling multiple benchmarks and using safe baseline data from previous commits rather than current commit baselines.

Co-authored-by: devboxerhub[bot] <devboxerhub[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/developers-guide.md, after:

# Developers guide

This guide collects day-to-day practices for contributors working on the
Chutoro codebase. It complements the more specialized documents in `docs/` and
keeps operational guidance in one place.

## Benchmarks

The `chutoro-benches` crate provides Criterion benchmarks for the four CPU
pipeline stages: Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) index construction,
edge harvest, minimum spanning tree (MST) computation, and hierarchy extraction.

### Running benchmarks

Run all benchmarks from the repository root:

```sh
make bench
```

Criterion writes HTML reports to `target/criterion/`. Open the report for a
specific group (for example `target/criterion/hnsw_build/report/index.html`) to
view timing distributions and comparisons against previous runs.

### Benchmark regression workflow

Benchmark regression detection follows a two-tier strategy:

- Pull request (PR) workflows run a fast benchmark smoke check using
  discovery mode (`--list`) to confirm that benchmark binaries still compile
  and enumerate benchmark cases.
- A scheduled weekly workflow (plus manual `workflow_dispatch`) runs
  Criterion baseline comparison by saving a reference baseline from `HEAD^` and
  comparing the current revision with `--baseline`.

Run the local baseline workflow for one benchmark from the repository root:

```sh
set -o pipefail
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_MEMORY_PROFILE=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_RECALL_REPORT=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_CLUSTER_QUALITY_REPORT=0 \
cargo bench -p chutoro-benches --bench hnsw_ef_sweep -- --save-baseline local-reference --noplot \
  2>&1 | tee /tmp/bench-hnsw-ef-sweep-save.log

set -o pipefail
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_MEMORY_PROFILE=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_RECALL_REPORT=0 \
CHUTORO_BENCH_HNSW_CLUSTER_QUALITY_REPORT=0 \
cargo bench -p chutoro-benches --bench hnsw_ef_sweep -- --baseline local-reference --noplot \
  2>&1 | tee /tmp/bench-hnsw-ef-sweep-compare.log
```

Use `--list` for a quick discovery check only:

```sh
set -o pipefail
cargo bench -p chutoro-benches --bench hnsw_ef_sweep -- --list \
  2>&1 | tee /tmp/bench-hnsw-ef-sweep-list.log
```

### Benchmark architecture

Benchmarks live in `chutoro-benches/benches/` as separate Criterion binaries.
Shared support code — the `SyntheticSource` data source, benchmark parameter
types, and the `BenchSetupError` error type — lives in the `chutoro-benches`
library (`chutoro-benches/src/`).

Each benchmark file follows this pattern:

1. A fallible `_impl` function performs all setup (data generation, HNSW
   build, MST computation) using `?` to propagate errors via `BenchSetupError`.
2. A thin wrapper registered with `criterion_group!` calls the `_impl`
   function and panics on failure.
3. The measured closure uses `b.iter()` or `b.iter_batched()` to time only
   the target operation.

### Lint policy for benchmarks

The `chutoro-benches` crate does **not** inherit workspace lints. Criterion's
macro expansions (`criterion_group!`, `criterion_main!`, `bench_with_input`
closures) trigger several of the strict workspace denials — most notably
`missing_docs`, `shadow_reuse`, and `excessive_nesting`. A crate-local
`[lints]` section in `chutoro-benches/Cargo.toml` mirrors the workspace
strictness for handwritten code. Benchmark source files use tightly scoped
`#![expect(lint, reason = "…")]` attributes for the lints that Criterion's
macro expansions unavoidably trigger. The rationale is documented in a comment
at the top of the `[lints.clippy]` section in `chutoro-benches/Cargo.toml`.

### Adding a new benchmark

1. Create a new file in `chutoro-benches/benches/`.
2. Add a corresponding `[[bench]]` entry in `chutoro-benches/Cargo.toml`.
3. Follow the fallible-setup pattern described above.
4. Use `#![expect(…)]` (not `#![allow(…)]`) for any Criterion-triggered lint
   suppressions, with a reason string.
5. Run `make bench` to verify the new benchmark appears in the output.

## Verus proofs

Verus is used for formal verification of edge harvest primitives. Run proofs
via `make verus`, which is idempotent and installs the pinned Verus release and
required Rust toolchain as needed.

### Quantifier trigger annotations

Verus prints warnings when it selects quantifier triggers automatically. Do not
ignore these warnings. Prefer explicit annotations so the prover behaviour is
stable and predictable:

- Use `#[trigger]` when a specific term should control instantiation.
- Use `#![auto]` only when the automatically chosen trigger is acceptable and
  the quantifier is straightforward.
- Avoid `--triggers-mode silent` in continuous integration (CI) because it
  hides trigger-selection changes.

Example:

```rust
assert forall|i: int| #![auto] 0 <= i < edges.len() implies edges[i].source == source_node;
```
